---
course_id: res-18-007-calculus-revisited-multivariable-calculus-fall-2011
is_media_gallery: true
layout: course_section
menu:
  leftnav:
    identifier: c4026cb5e0a638f4a7f61f66897500ed
    name: 'Part I: Vector Arithmetic'
    weight: 10
title: 'Part I: Vector Arithmetic'
type: course
uid: c4026cb5e0a638f4a7f61f66897500ed

---

Professor Gross introduces the arithmetic of vectors in terms of the structure of a game. In particular, he shows how the arithmetic of vectors helps us define planes and lines analytically.{{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-i/lecture-1-the-game-of-mathematics" section="Part I: Vector Arithmetic" title="Lecture 1: The Game of Mathematics" description="Video Description: Herb Gross introduces Calculus Revisited II — Functions of Several Variables — and discusses the over-arching theme The Game of Mathematics. A game has objectives, rules, and definitions as well as strategies (logical plans) for meeting the objectives of the game. A mathematical structure is identical with the objective being to model real-world experience. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/wsOoClvZmic/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-i/lecture-2-arrow-arithmetic" section="Part I: Vector Arithmetic" title="Lecture 2: Arrow Arithmetic" description="Video Description: Herb Gross reviews the definition of vectors — objects that have magnitude, direction, and sense. He also defines equality of vectors, their components, and rules of arithmetic. Vector arithmetic shares many structural properties with scalar arithmetic including a zero and additive inverse. This video also covers the multiplication of a vector times a scalar. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/nFf_SJRwfaY/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-i/lecture-3-three-dimensional-vectors" section="Part I: Vector Arithmetic" title="Lecture 3: Three-Dimensional Vectors" description="Video Description: Herb Gross introduces 3-dimensional vectors — those with 3 othogonal components (x, y, z directions). This video also covers 3-dimensional magnitude and arithmetic in Cartesian coordinates (not polar coordinates). Prof. Gross also explains how 3-dimensional vectors are structurally the same as 2-dimensional vectors. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/JAxRgACOQtA/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-i/lecture-4-the-dot-product" section="Part I: Vector Arithmetic" title="Lecture 4: The Dot Product" description="Video Description: Herb Gross motivates the definition of the dot product: Work = Force x Distance. He also shows how to calculate the dot product of two vectors in 3-space. Other topics include projections, directional cosines, and the arithmetic structure of the dot product. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/y9Sa8StSX-M/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-i/lecture-5-the-cross-product" section="Part I: Vector Arithmetic" title="Lecture 5: The Cross Product" description="Video Description: Herb Gross defines the arithmetic structure of the cross product of two vectors. He then provides an interpretation of the magnitude of cross product as area. He concludes with a brief look at determinants. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/Yw8vBDhVs8o/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-i/lecture-6-equations-of-lines-planes" section="Part I: Vector Arithmetic" title="Lecture 6: Equations of Lines & Planes" description="Video Description: Herb Gross discusses the topic of equations of lines and planes in 3-dimensional space. Topics include: The normal vector to a plane; Parallel planes; Equation of a plane; Equation of a line in space. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/Brmq13Waa_Y/default.jpg" >}}