---
course_id: res-18-007-calculus-revisited-multivariable-calculus-fall-2011
is_media_gallery: true
layout: course_section
menu:
  leftnav:
    identifier: 852f69467e15354e2b25115e4cf094f4
    name: 'Part III: Partial Derivatives'
    weight: 30
title: 'Part III: Partial Derivatives'
type: course
uid: 852f69467e15354e2b25115e4cf094f4

---

In this part, Professor Gross uses the "game of mathematics" concept to develop an analytical way to extend the domain of a function to beyond 3 dimensions. In particular, he shows how by using vector arithmetic, the rules of arithmetic that were used in developing the calculus of a single variable turn out to be the same that we use to develop the calculus of several variables. This leads to a discussion of how we replace the concept of slope in the 2 and 3-dimensional calculus by such concepts as the directional derivative when dealing with more than 3 dimensions.{{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-iii/lecture-1-n-dimensional-vector-spaces" section="Part III: Partial Derivatives" title="Lecture 1: n-Dimensional Vector Spaces" description="Video Description: Herb Gross describes n-dimensional vector spaces, relating definitions to the concept of a mathematical structure. Also covered: n-tuples in n-dimensional space; Structure of n-dimensional vector spaces; Definition of distance between two n-tuples; Limits of real-valued functions of several real variables. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/sSuZn6KHLnU/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-iii/lecture-2-calculus-of-several-variables" section="Part III: Partial Derivatives" title="Lecture 2: Calculus of Several Variables" description="Video Description: Herb Gross introduces us to the traditional Calculus of Several Variables. He defines and explains the properties of partial derivatives and shows how to draw a graph of a function of several variables. He finds the normal vector (using the cross product) and the tangent plane at a point in terms of partial derivatives. Finally, Prof. Gross shows the change of a function w in the tangent plane as an approximation to the differential of w. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/UGKL1wHouho/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-iii/lecture-3-directional-derivatives" section="Part III: Partial Derivatives" title="Lecture 3: Directional Derivatives" description="Video Description: Herb Gross defines the directional derivative and demonstrates how to calculate it, emphasizing the importance of this topic in the study of Calculus of Several Variables. He also covers the definition of a gradient vector. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/SFB2Fxel6iM/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-iii/lecture-4-the-chain-rule" section="Part III: Partial Derivatives" title="Lecture 4: The Chain Rule" description="Video Description: Herb Gross shows examples of the chain rule for several variables and develops a proof of the chain rule. He also explains how the chain rule works with higher order partial derivatives and mixed partial derivatives. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/JSs_dqq2uWo/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-iii/lecture-5-integrals-involving-parameters" section="Part III: Partial Derivatives" title="Lecture 5: Integrals Involving Parameters" description="Video Description: Herb Gross show how the chain rule is involved in finding some integrals involving parameters. He computes the derivatives of integrals with constant limits, as well as derivatives of integrals with variable limits of integration (chain rule). Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/__NxbJzEMCU/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-iii/lecture-6-exact-differentials" section="Part III: Partial Derivatives" title="Lecture 6: Exact Differentials" description="Video Description: Herb Gross explains the necessary and sufficient condition for an expression of the form Mdx + Ndy to be an exact differential. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/Rvnv3bPDCs8/default.jpg" >}}