---
course_id: res-18-007-calculus-revisited-multivariable-calculus-fall-2011
is_media_gallery: true
layout: course_section
menu:
  leftnav:
    identifier: 8e4866a43ba4db3d0267f6a59263502c
    name: 'Part II: Vector Calculus'
    weight: 20
title: 'Part II: Vector Calculus'
type: course
uid: 8e4866a43ba4db3d0267f6a59263502c

---

In the [Single Variable Calculus](/courses/res-18-006-calculus-revisited-single-variable-calculus-fall-2010/sections/study-materials) course, Professor Gross discussed the calculus of a single real variable in which the domain of a function was a subset of the real numbers. Geometrically speaking, the domain of a function was a subset of the x-axis. In this part of the course, he generalizes the domain as being a subset of either the two-dimensional xy-plane and/or the three-dimensional xyz-space. Now, in the language of vectors, a function maps 2 and 3 dimensional vectors into the set of real numbers. He then uses these functions to show how we compute the velocity and acceleration of an object moving in space.{{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-ii/lecture-1-vector-functions-of-a-scalar-variable" section="Part II: Vector Calculus" title="Lecture 1: Vector Functions of a Scalar Variable" description="Video Description: Herb Gross introduces the topic of vector functions of scalar variables and explains why the result is a vector (since the inputs are scalars). He then reviews limits (definition and related theorems) and presents the topic of differentiation of limits of vector functions. Finally, Prof. Gross then provides an example using velocity and acceleration as a demonstration of vector calculus in real life. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/NG9hkGQwT3k/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-ii/lecture-2-tangential-normal-vectors" section="Part II: Vector Calculus" title="Lecture 2: Tangential & Normal Vectors" description="Video Description: Herb Gross explains how a vector is tangent to a curve at a point as a function of arc length. Likewise, he explains how a vector is normal to a curve as a function of the derivative of the tangent with regard to arc length and curvature. Prof. Gross presents an example tracking the velocity and acceleration of a particle moving along a curve.  Finally, he discusses similar issues and examples for 3-dimensional curves (binormal). Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/f93PZ9ZyvDk/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-ii/lecture-3-polar-coordinates" section="Part II: Vector Calculus" title="Lecture 3: Polar Coordinates" description="Video Description: Herb Gross defines and demonstrates the use of polar coordinates. He describes the non-uniqueness of polar coordinates and how to calculate the slope of a curve, which depends on the angle the curve makes with the radius vector. Finally, he computes the area (in terms of polar coordinates) of the region between two rays. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/ZyhCnulIApY/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-ii/lecture-4-vectors-in-polar-coordinates" section="Part II: Vector Calculus" title="Lecture 4: Vectors in Polar Coordinates" description="Video Description: Herb Gross describes vectors and polar coordinates. Topics include: Motion in the plane; Velocity and acceleration of polar coordinates. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/0Uz-TR_vZKs/default.jpg" >}}